I’m checking this revision against the remaining weak spots—authority boundaries, orchestrator modes, validation realism, secret handling, concurrency, API hardening, and git/runtime hygiene—and I’ll call out any contradictions directly.

I’ve narrowed it down to cross-section consistency and enforceability: external Claw mode still conflicts with the “IPC-only/no direct model calls” language, and some budget/logging claims look stronger than that mode can actually support.

Thought for 10m 12s

This is the strongest version so far.

I’d call v2.1 the first version that is genuinely alpha-buildable. The big architectural risks from v1 are mostly gone, and most of the important refinements from v2 landed well.

My short verdict:

v1: good idea, unsafe foundation
v2: solid prototype architecture
v2.1: strong implementation spec, but not quite spec-frozen

What got materially better

These were the right changes.

You resolved most of the earlier ambiguity.

External vs embedded orchestrator modes are now explicit.

The artifact execution plane is separated from the agent plane.

Strict freshness for retries now matches your Meeseeks philosophy.

Scope expansion is a real mechanism instead of an unhandled failure case.

Typed semantic index queries are much better than vague NL lookups.

Git hygiene and .axiom/ lifecycle are now specified.

Prompt-injection and secret-routing finally moved from slogans into policy.

That is a big step up. The doc now has a real control plane, real trust boundaries, and real operational policy.

My updated overall assessment

I would now say:

Build this, but do one more tightening pass before you treat the architecture as final.

The remaining problems are no longer “bad foundation” problems. They are mostly:

internal consistency issues

one or two correctness gaps

security hardening details

schema/spec mismatches

The most important remaining issues
1. Orchestrator mode is still slightly inconsistent across sections

You fixed this conceptually, but the doc still says different things in different places.

The biggest examples:

8.1 says the orchestrator runs inside a Docker container in the Untrusted Agent Plane.

8.2 says external client mode exists, where the orchestrator connects over the API and does its own inference out of band.

8.6 says the orchestrator interacts with the engine exclusively through IPC and shall not make model API calls directly.

Those three statements cannot all be true at once.

What you want is probably:

Embedded orchestrator

in Docker

IPC contract

no direct provider calls

fully budgeted and audited

External orchestrator

outside Docker

REST/WebSocket contract

may do its own inference

only engine-side execution is budgeted by Axiom

Right now the architecture understands that distinction, but the text still mixes them.

Fix: split the orchestrator contract into two subsections: embedded contract and external client contract. Update the high-level diagram too, because it still visually places “Claw/CC/etc” in Docker.

2. The retry model and the approval pipeline still disagree in wording

You fixed strict freshness in 5.1, 10.5, and 30.1. Good.

But 14.2 still repeatedly says things like:

feedback is delivered to the Meeseeks

Meeseeks revises and resubmits

That reads like the same worker persists across revision rounds, which is exactly what you no longer want.

This is mostly editorial now, but it matters because retry behavior is a foundational design choice.

Fix: in every reject/fail branch in the pipeline, say:

current Meeseeks is destroyed

a fresh Meeseeks is spawned

a new TaskSpec is produced containing structured failure history

3. The test-generation flow still has a correctness gap

This is the biggest remaining design issue.

You now say in 11.5:

implementation task runs

implementation passes existing validation

implementation merges

test-generation task runs against committed implementation

That solves the stale-context problem for test generation, but it creates a new one:

the implementation can be committed before the newly generated tests ever exist.

That means the implementation can pass:

compile

lint

existing tests

but still fail the new tests once they are created.

You need to define what happens then.

Right now, 14.2 Stage 2 says validation includes “both existing tests and any new tests from separate test tasks,” which conflicts with your own sequencing in 11.5. Those new tests do not exist yet at implementation-validation time.

So you need to choose one of these models:

Model A: post-merge test discovery

implementation merges after passing existing checks

new test task is generated afterward

if those tests fail, Axiom creates a follow-up implementation-fix task

completion criteria require both implementation and generated tests to converge

Model B: candidate-snapshot test generation

generate tests against a candidate implementation snapshot before final merge

validate both together

only then commit

Either can work. Right now the document says a bit of both.

This is the main thing I would not leave ambiguous.

4. Budget guarantees are still too broad for external orchestrators

This is much better than v2, but there is still a scope mismatch.

You now correctly say in 8.2 that external client mode only gives partial budget tracking. Good.

But earlier design language still implies that Axiom respects the project budget ceiling globally. That is only true for engine-managed spend, not for external orchestrator reasoning spend.

So in external client mode, the true total project cost can exceed the Axiom budget even if Axiom itself stays under budget.

Fix: define two budgets explicitly:

Execution Budget

enforced by Axiom

covers Meeseeks, reviewers, sub-orchestrators, embedded orchestrators

External Orchestrator Spend

not enforceable by Axiom unless the client reports it

shown as unknown / out-of-band unless integrated

That makes the contract honest.

5. Secret-aware routing is improved, but “force to BitNet” is too rigid

This is a smart addition, but the current policy is too narrow:

Tasks touching sensitive files SHALL be forced to BitNet local models unless the user explicitly approves external inference.

That will break down for real sensitive tasks like:

auth systems

cryptographic code

complex production config

security refactors

Those are often the tasks least suited to a tiny local model.

So the right concept is not “force to BitNet.” It is:

force to local-only inference class, or require explicit override

That local-only class might include:

BitNet for trivial sensitive work

stronger local models if the user has them

or human-only/manual mode for high-risk code

Otherwise the architecture silently trades data safety for code-quality failure.

6. Your lock model is stronger, but the schema still does not fully represent it

Conceptually, the locking story is now much better. But the schema still lags behind the behavior.

Examples:

task_target_files has lock_scope, but task_locks still only stores file_path.

You now support file/package/module/schema-level locks, but the lock table does not really model a general lock key.

cancelled_eco references “details” or maybe eco_ref, but neither is actually in the tasks schema.

Those are not just editorial nits. They are implementation traps.

Fix: normalize the lock resource itself. Something like:

resource_type = file | package | module | schema

resource_key = canonical identifier

task_id

locked_at

And either:

add eco_ref directly to tasks, or

create a separate task lineage / invalidation table

Right now the behavior is richer than the schema.

7. API/query interfaces are still slightly inconsistent

You made the semantic index API typed, which is the right move.

But a few interfaces still look like older, looser versions:

17.5 says natural-language queries are not supported.

27.6 still has axiom index query "<query>", which reads like free-form text.

24.2 exposes GET /api/v1/index/query, but your typed API examples look more like structured request bodies.

That is easy to fix, but worth fixing. You want one story:

typed CLI flags

or JSON stdin / file input

and probably POST rather than GET for structured queries

8. Warm sandbox pools are useful, but they slightly weaken your isolation story unless tightened

This is not a blocker, but it is the one optimization I would treat carefully.

Pre-warmed validation sandboxes can reduce latency, but they also introduce risk of:

state contamination between validations

leftover processes

mutated caches

non-hermetic incremental behavior

You did say overlays are reset, which helps. But I would want explicit guarantees:

overlay fully discarded each run

all child processes reaped

temp directories recreated

periodic full cold validation after N uses

no writable shared cache except intentionally scoped dependency caches

Otherwise you slowly erode the clean isolation you worked hard to establish.

For MVP, I would consider leaving warm pools as an optimization behind a feature flag.

9. Container hardening is still a little too “default Docker”

You have:

non-root

no network

resource limits

no project mount

That is good, but I still think you should add explicit hardening language for both agent containers and validation sandboxes:

read-only root filesystem

dropped Linux capabilities

no-new-privileges

seccomp/AppArmor profile

PID limits

tmpfs for writable scratch dirs where appropriate

You are already thinking like a security-first system. This is the missing last mile.

10. Root-system Claw “bypass” should probably be collapsed into delegated approval

This one is more product-philosophy than hard architecture, but I would still change it.

You currently have both:

srs_approval_delegate = "claw"

claw_srs_bypass = true

That is redundant and a little dangerous. “Bypass” sounds stronger and less auditable than “delegated approval,” while functionally they are very close.

Given your whole philosophy is built around explicit scope lock, I would simplify:

keep delegated approval

drop the separate “bypass” concept

That preserves the trust model more cleanly.

Smaller things I would still tidy

These are lower priority, but worth cleaning up.

2.3 says all transmitted data is logged, but 31 makes payload logging opt-in.
Better wording: transmission events and metadata are always logged; payload bodies are logged only if observability is enabled.

28.2 says clean working tree “SHOULD” be required.
I would make that behavior deterministic: either refuse to run on dirty state, or automatically use a dedicated worktree.

Overview still says agents run in isolated Docker containers.
That is not fully true for external orchestrators. Easy wording fix.

Where I’d place this version

I’d summarize v2.1 like this:

Architecturally strong, operationally close, still worth one final consistency pass.

If you started building from this version, I do not think you’d regret the major design choices. That is the big milestone.

The remaining work is mostly:

making every section tell the same story

closing the test-generation loop

tightening schema alignment

hardening execution containers

My recommended v2.2 punch list

If I were editing this into a near-final architecture doc, I would make these next:

Split orchestrator contract into embedded vs external subsections and update the diagrams.

Rewrite approval-pipeline reject paths to match strict fresh-container retries.

Resolve the implementation-vs-test-generation sequencing and define the post-test-failure loop.

Scope budget language to engine-managed spend in external client mode.

Replace “force to BitNet” with “force to local-only execution class.”

Normalize lock resources and add explicit eco_ref/task-lineage schema support.

Make CLI/API index queries fully typed and consistent.

Add explicit container hardening policy.

Treat warm sandbox pools as optional optimization with reset guarantees.

Remove the separate Claw SRS bypass knob and keep delegated approval only.

So the honest answer is: this is very good now. It reads like a serious system design instead of a smart concept note. The remaining issues are concrete enough that a v2.2 can probably settle most of them.
